In this paper authors identified the differentiation of human granulocytic by miR-223 and two transcriptional factors, NFI-A and C/EBPα, in a feedback loop mechanism. The human counterparts of the murine miR-223 has been utilized to study the hematopoiesis. A CCAAT-related binding protein controlling gene (NFI-A) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-α (C/EBPα) have been identified as miR-223 targets. Both transcriptional factors were shown as miR-223 activators; sustained levels of C/EBPα was required for miR-223 expression following RA treatment, while the reduction levels of NFI-A increased the differentiation of RA-treated myeloid. The results showed that, in APL cells, C/EBP interact in vivo with miR-223 promoter and that this binding correlates with both miR-223 upregulation and response of these cells to RA. Specific sequence elements upstream of miR-223 were shown to interact with specific translational factors NFI-A and C/EBPα. The results indicated that one of the two C/EBPα binding sites in miR-223 molecule overlaps with a NFI-A binding site; therefore, it was concluded that the two translational factors may compete in the regulation of miR-223 promoter. In one citing paper (Fukao et al., 2007) authors observed a different result when the same experimental system as explained in the work of Fazi et al., were conducted in mice. Fukao et al. thus proposed that the machinery reported in human miR-223 regulation might not be a conserved mechanism of miR-223 regulation. In conclusion, the article provided factors that have an important role in human granulopoiesis which may use in the development of novel therapeutics to leukemia. However, later Fukao et al., 2007 conducted a similar study which could not find such a relation in murine miR-223 stating that human miR-223 regulation reported in this paper might not be a conserved mechanism. Altogether, this paper reports the role of miR-223 in granulopoiesis and NFI-A as its novel key regulator. It has been also known for its important role in cell differentiation by acting as translational inhibitors. miR-223 has been recognized for its role in regulation of granulocyte development in both human and mice.